# 1.1 VLAN creation

# Local network creation for the server

A VLAN (Virtual Local Area Network) is a logical network that groups network devices in the same network, regardless of their physical location. It allows to separate network traffic into different segments, creating isolated groups of devices to improve network security and performance. VLANs are a common practice in computer networks, especially in corporate environments, where it is necessary to separate different departments and ensure information security. In a virtualized datacenter environment, VLAN creation is even more important to ensure the security and availability of services.

In this article, I will show how to create a local vlan on Ubuntu 20.04 LTS, which uses netplan as the network manager. Before we get our hands dirty, it is important to define some things, such as the IP range, the subnet mask and the vlan name. Below we see what these items are.

### 1. IP range and subnet mask:

- An IP range is a set of IP addresses that belong to the same network or subnet. For example, the IP range 192.168.1.0 - 192.168.1.255 corresponds to all IP addresses that start with 192.168.1 and have the last octet varying from 0 to 255, knowing this you can choose any IP range you want in this example we will use the IP range 192.168.20.1
- A subnet mask is a 32-bit number that indicates which bits of the IP address are used to identify the network or subnet and which bits are used to identify the host (device) within the network or subnet. For example, the subnet mask 255.255.255.0 corresponds to the prefix /24 and means that the first 24 bits of the IP address are used to identify the network or subnet and the last 8 bits are used to identify the host, so we will use the standard that supports 223 machines being this /24, so our final IP range is: 192.168.20.0/24.

```bash
ip a
```

This command will show all the network interfaces of our system, with their respective names, states and addresses. For example, we can see something like this:

```
1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
    link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
    inet 127.0.0.1/8 scope host lo
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 ::1/128 scope host
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
2: enp0s3: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc fq_codel state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 08:00:27:e6:e5:59 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    inet 10.0.2.15/24 brd 10.0.2.255 scope global dynamic noprefixroute enp0s3
       valid_lft 86399sec preferred_lft 86399sec
    inet6 fe80::a00:27ff:fee6:e559/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
3: wlp2s0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 00:16:ea:12:34:56 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    inet 192.168.1.100/24 brd 192.168.1.255 scope global dynamic noprefixroute wlp2s0
       valid_lft 86399sec preferred_lft 86399sec
    inet6 fe80::216:eaff:fe12:3456/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever

```

In this case, we have three network interfaces: lo, which is the loopback interface; enp0s3, which is an ethernet interface; wlp2s0, which is a wifi interface. Now we will create a vlan with the name lab with the settings already chosen and for that we will use netplan, which is a tool to configure networks on Ubuntu. Netplan uses YAML files to define network settings. We will edit the file /etc/netplan/01-network-manager-all.yaml with the following content:

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: NetworkManager
  ethernets:
    wlp2s0:
      dhcp4: yes
      
  vlans:
    lab:
      id: 10
      link: wlp2s0
      addresses:
        - 192.168.20.1/24

```

This file will create a new network interface called lab, which is a subinterface of the wifi interface wlp2s0. The id is the identifier of the vlan we want to create. In this case, we use the id 10,

## Important notes
- This vlan completely isolates the traffic of this network. Therefore, computers connected to it will not have access to the internet.
- The IP that is set in addresses in the configuration is the IP on which the host system will connect to the network. Therefore, it will be visible on this IP.
